README.md, before:

# Exhort JavaScript API<br/>![latest-no-snapshot][0] ![latest-snapshot][1]

* Looking for the OpenAPI Spec? Try [Exhort API Spec](https://github.com/trustification/exhort-api-spec)
* Looking for our Java API? Try [Exhort Java API](https://github.com/trustification/exhort-java-api).
* Looking for our Backend implementation? Try [Exhort](https://github.com/trustification/exhort).

The _Exhort JavaScript API_ module is deployed to _GitHub Package Registry_.

<details>
<summary>Click here for configuring <em>GHPR</em> registry access.</summary>
<h3>Configure Registry Access</h3>
<p>
Create a
<a href="https://docs.github.com/en/packages/learn-github-packages/introduction-to-github-packages#authenticating-to-github-packages">token</a>
with the <strong>read:packages</strong> scope<br/>

> Based on
> <a href="https://docs.github.com/en/packages/working-with-a-github-packages-registry/working-with-the-npm-registry#authenticating-to-github-packages">GitHub documentation</a>,
> In <em>Actions</em> you can use <em>GITHUB_TOKEN</em>
</p>
<p>

Add the following line to the <em>.npmrc</em> file in your user home (
See [GH Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/packages/working-with-a-github-packages-registry/working-with-the-npm-registry#authenticating-with-a-personal-access-token)):

```text
//npm.pkg.github.com/:_authToken=<your-ghp-token-goes-here>
```
</p>
</details>

<h3>Usage</h3>
<p>
Configuring <em>NPM</em> to look in <em>GHPR</em> for the <em>trustification</em> namespace is done by adding
<code>@trustification:registry=https://npm.pkg.github.com</code> to <em>.npmrc</em> in the project root or user home.

```shell
echo "@trustification:registry=https://npm.pkg.github.com" >> .npmrc
```
</p>

<ul>
<li>
Use as ESM Module from an ESM module

```shell
npm install @trustification/exhort-javascript-api
```

```javascript
import exhort from '@trustification/exhort-javascript-api'
import fs from 'node:fs'

// Get stack analysis in JSON format
let stackAnalysis = await exhort.stackAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml')
// Get stack analysis in HTML format (string)
let stackAnalysisHtml = await exhort.stackAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml', true)
// Get component analysis in JSON format
let componentAnalysis = await exhort.componentAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml')
```
</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>
Use as ESM Module from Common-JS module

```shell
npm install @trustification/exhort-javascript-api
```

```javascript
async function loadExhort()
{
// dynamic import is the only way to import ESM module into commonJS module
  const { default: exhort } = await import('@trustification/exhort-javascript-api');
  return exhort
}
const runExhort = (manifestPath) => {
  return new Promise(async ( resolve, reject) => {
    try {
      let stackAnalysisReport = await (await loadExhort()).stackAnalysis(manifestPath,false)
      resolve(stackAnalysisReport)

    } catch (error)
    {
      reject(error)
    }
  });
};

runExhort("./path/to/manifest").then(resp => console.log(JSON.stringify(resp,null,4)))
```
</li>

<li>
Use as CLI Script
<details>
<summary>Click for help menu</summary>

```shell
$ npx @trustification/exhort-javascript-api help

Usage: exhort-javascript-api {component|stack}

Commands:
  exhort-javascript-api stack </path/to/manifest> [--html|--summary]               produce stack report for manifest path
  exhort-javascript-api component <path/to/manifest> [--summary]   produce component report for a manifest type and content

Options:
  --help  Show help                                                    [boolean]
```
</details>

```shell
# get stack analysis in json format
$ npx @trustification/exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml

# get stack analysis in json format (summary only)
$ npx @trustification/exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml --summary

# get stack analysis in html format format
$ npx @trustification/exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml --html

# get component analysis
$ npx @trustification/exhort-javascript-api component /path/to/pom.xml
```
</li>

<li>
Use as Global Binary

```shell
npm install --global @trustification/exhort-javascript-api
```

```shell
# get stack analysis in json format
$ exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml

# get stack analysis in json format (summary only)
$ exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml --summary

# get stack analysis in html format format
$ exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml --html

# get component analysis
$ exhort-javascript-api component /path/to/pom.xml
```
</li>
</ul>

<h3>Supported Ecosystems</h3>
<ul>
<li><a href="https://www.java.com/">Java</a> - <a href="https://maven.apache.org/">Maven</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.javascript.com/">JavaScript</a> - <a href="https://www.npmjs.com/">Npm</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.javascript.com/">JavaScript</a> - <a href="https://pnpm.io/">pnpm</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.javascript.com/">JavaScript</a> - <a href="https://classic.yarnpkg.com/">Yarn Classic</a> /  <a href="https://yarnpkg.com/">Yarn Berry</a></li>
<li><a href="https://go.dev/">Golang</a> - <a href="https://go.dev/blog/using-go-modules/">Go Modules</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.python.org/">Python</a> - <a href="https://pypi.org/project/pip/">pip Installer</a></li>
<li><a href="https://gradle.org/">Gradle (Groovy and Kotlin DSL)</a> - <a href="https://gradle.org/install/">Gradle Installation</a></li>
</ul>

<h3>Excluding Packages</h3>
<p>
Excluding a package from any analysis can be achieved by marking the package for exclusion.
</p>

<ul>
<li>
<em>Java Maven</em> users can add a comment in <em>pom.xml</em>

```xml
<dependency> <!--exhortignore-->
  <groupId>...</groupId>
  <artifactId>...</artifactId>
  <version>...</version>
</dependency>
```
</li>

</ul>
<ul>
<li>
<em>Javascript</em> users can add a root (key, value) pair with value of list of names (strings) to be ignored (without versions), and key called <b>exhortignore</b> in <em>package.json</em>,  example:

```json
{
  "name": "sample",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "js",
  "keywords": [],
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC",
  "dependencies": {
    "dotenv": "^8.2.0",
    "express": "^4.17.1",
    "jsonwebtoken": "^8.5.1",
    "mongoose": "^5.9.18"
  },
  "exhortignore": [
    "jsonwebtoken"
  ]
}
```

<em>Golang</em> users can add in go.mod a comment with //exhortignore next to the package to be ignored, or to "piggyback" on existing comment ( e.g - //indirect) , for example:
```go
module github.com/trustification/SaaSi/deployer

go 1.19

require (
        github.com/gin-gonic/gin v1.9.1
        github.com/google/uuid v1.1.2
        github.com/jessevdk/go-flags v1.5.0 //exhortignore
        github.com/kr/pretty v0.3.1
        gopkg.in/yaml.v2 v2.4.0
        k8s.io/apimachinery v0.26.1
        k8s.io/client-go v0.26.1
)

require (
        github.com/davecgh/go-spew v1.1.1 // indirect exhortignore
        github.com/emicklei/go-restful/v3 v3.9.0 // indirect
        github.com/go-logr/logr v1.2.3 // indirect //exhortignore

)
```

<em>Python pip</em> users can add in requirements.txt a comment with #exhortignore(or # exhortignore) to the right of the same artifact to be ignored, for example:
```properties
anyio==3.6.2
asgiref==3.4.1
beautifulsoup4==4.12.2
certifi==2023.7.22
chardet==4.0.0
click==8.0.4 #exhortignore
contextlib2==21.6.0
fastapi==0.75.1
Flask==2.0.3
h11==0.13.0
idna==2.10
immutables==0.19
importlib-metadata==4.8.3
itsdangerous==2.0.1
Jinja2==3.0.3
MarkupSafe==2.0.1
pydantic==1.9.2 # exhortignore
requests==2.25.1
six==1.16.0
sniffio==1.2.0
soupsieve==2.3.2.post1
starlette==0.17.1
typing_extensions==4.1.1
urllib3==1.26.16
uvicorn==0.17.0
Werkzeug==2.0.3
zipp==3.6.0

```

<em>Gradle</em> users can add in build.gradle a comment with //exhortignore next to the package to be ignored:
```build.gradle
plugins {
id 'java'
}

group = 'groupName'
version = 'version'

repositories {
    mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation "groupId:artifactId:version" // exhortignore
}
test {
    useJUnitPlatform()
}
```

All of the 5 above examples are valid for marking a package to be ignored
</li>

</ul>

<h3>Customization</h3>
<p>
There are 2 approaches for customizing <em>Exhort JavaScript API</em>. Whether you're using this API as a
<em>Global Module</em>, a <em>Remote Script</em>, or an <em>ESM Module</em>, you can use <em>Environment Variables</em>
for various customization.

However, <em>ESM Module</em> users, can opt for customizing programmatically:

```javascript
import exhort from '@trustification/exhort-javascript-api'
import fs from 'node:fs'

let options = {
  'EXHORT_MVN_PATH': '/path/to/my/mvn',
  'EXHORT_NPM_PATH': '/path/to/npm',
  'EXHORT_PNPM_PATH': '/path/to/pnpm',
  'EXHORT_GO_PATH': '/path/to/go',
  //python - python3, pip3 take precedence if python version > 3 installed
  'EXHORT_PYTHON3_PATH' : '/path/to/python3',
  'EXHORT_PIP3_PATH' : '/path/to/pip3',
  'EXHORT_PYTHON_PATH' : '/path/to/python',
  'EXHORT_PIP_PATH' : '/path/to/pip',
  'EXHORT_GRADLE_PATH' : '/path/to/gradle',
  // Configure proxy for all requests
  'EXHORT_PROXY_URL': 'http://proxy.example.com:8080'
}

// Get stack analysis in JSON format ( all package managers, pom.xml is as an example here)
let stackAnalysis = await exhort.stackAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml', false, options)
// Get stack analysis in HTML format in string ( all package managers, pom.xml is as an example here)
let stackAnalysisHtml = await exhort.stackAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml', true, options)

// Get component analysis in JSON format
let componentAnalysis = await exhort.componentAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml', options)
```
 **_Environment variables takes precedence._**
</p>

<h4>Proxy Configuration</h4>
<p>
You can configure a proxy for all HTTP/HTTPS requests made by the API. This is useful when your environment requires going through a proxy to access external services.

You can set the proxy URL in two ways:

1. Using environment variable:
```shell
export EXHORT_PROXY_URL=http://proxy.example.com:8080
```

2. Using the options object when calling the API programmatically:
```javascript
const options = {
  'EXHORT_PROXY_URL': 'http://proxy.example.com:8080'
}
```

The proxy URL should be in the format: `http://host:port` or `https://host:port`. The API will automatically use the appropriate protocol (HTTP or HTTPS) based on the proxy URL provided.
</p>

<h4>Customizing Executables</h4>
<p>
This project uses each ecosystem's executable for creating dependency trees. These executables are expected to be
present on the system's PATH environment. If they are not, or perhaps you want to use custom ones. Use can use the
following keys for setting custom paths for the said executables.
</p>

<table>
<tr>
<th>Ecosystem</th>
<th>Default</th>
<th>Executable Key</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://maven.apache.org/">Maven</a></td>
<td><em>mvn</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_MVN_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://maven.apache.org/">Maven</a></td>
<td><em>maven</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PREFER_MVNW</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://www.npmjs.com/">NPM</a></td>
<td><em>npm</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_NPM_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://pnpm.io/">PNPM</a></td>
<td><em>pnpm</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PNPM_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://classic.yarnpkg.com/">Yarn Classic</a> / <a href="https://yarnpkg.com/">Yarn Berry</a></td>
<td><em>yarn</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_YARN_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://go.dev/blog/using-go-modules/">Go Modules</a></td>
<td><em>go</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_GO_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://www.python.org/">Python programming language</a></td>
<td><em>python3</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PYTHON3_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://pypi.org/project/pip/">Python pip Package Installer</a></td>
<td><em>pip3</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PIP3_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://www.python.org/">Python programming language</a></td>
<td><em>python</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PYTHON_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://pypi.org/project/pip/">Python pip Package Installer</a></td>
<td><em>pip</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PIP_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://gradle.org/">Gradle</a></td>
<td><em>gradle</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_GRADLE_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://gradle.org/">Gradle</a></td>
<td><em>gradle</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PREFER_GRADLEW</td>
</tr>
</table>

#### Match Manifest Versions Feature

##### Background

In Python pip and in golang go modules package managers ( especially in Python pip) , There is a big chance that for a certain manifest and a given package inside it, the client machine environment has different version installed/resolved
for that package, which can lead to perform the analysis on the installed packages' versions , instead on the declared versions ( in manifests - that is requirements.txt/go.mod ), and this
can cause a confusion for the user in the client consuming the API and leads to inconsistent output ( in THE manifest there is version X For a given Package `A` , and in the analysis report there is another version for the same package `A` - Y).

##### Usage

To eliminate confusion and improve clarity as discussed above, the following setting was introduced - `MATCH_MANIFEST_VERSIONS`, in the form of environment variable/key in opts ( as usual , environment variable takes precedence )
for two ecosystems:
 - Golang - Go Modules
 - Python - pip

Two possible values for this setting:

1. MATCH_MANIFEST_VERSIONS="false" - means that if installed/resolved versions of packages are different than the ones declared in the manifest, the process will ignore this difference and will continue to analysis with installed/resolved versions ( this is the original logic flow )
<br>


2. MATCH_MANIFEST_VERSIONS="true" - means that before starting the analysis,
   the api will compare all the versions of packages in manifest against installed/resolved versions on client' environment, in case there is a difference, it will throw an error to the client/user with message containing the first encountered versions mismatch, including package name, and the versions difference, and will suggest to set setting `MATCH_MANIFEST_VERSIONS`="false" to ignore all differences


#### Golang Support

By default, all go.mod' packages' transitive modules will be taken to analysis with their original package version, that is,
if go.mod has 2 modules, `a` and `b`, and each one of them has the same package c with same major version v1, but different minor versions:
- namespace/c/v1@v1.1
- namespace/c/v1@v1.2


Then both of these packages will be entered to the generated sbom and will be included in analysis returned to client.
In golang, in an actual build of an application into an actual application executable binary, only one of the minor versions will be included in the executable, as only packages with same name but different major versions considered different packages ,
hence can co-exist together in the application executable.

Go ecosystem knows how to select one minor version among all the minor versions of the same major version of a given package, using the [MVS Algorithm](https://go.dev/ref/mod#minimal-version-selection).

In order to enable this behavior, that only shows in analysis modules versions that are actually built into the application executable, please set
system property/environment variable - `EXHORT_GO_MVS_LOGIC_ENABLED=true`(Default is false)




#### Python Support

By default, For python support, the api assumes that the package is installed using the pip/pip3 binary on the system PATH, or using the customized
Binaries passed to environment variables. In any case, If the package is not installed , then an error will be thrown.

There is an experimental feature of installing the requirements.txt on a virtual env(only python3 or later is supported for this feature) - in this case,
it's important to pass in a path to python3 binary as `EXHORT_PYTHON3_PATH` or instead make sure that python3 is on the system path.
in such case, You can use that feature by setting environment variable `EXHORT_PYTHON_VIRTUAL_ENV` to true.

##### "Best Efforts Installation"
Since Python pip packages are very sensitive/picky regarding python version changes( every small range of versions is only tailored for a certain python version), I'm introducing this feature, that
tries to install all packages in requirements.txt onto created virtual environment while **disregarding** versions declared for packages in requirements.txt.
This increasing the chances and the probability that the automatic installation will succeed.

###### Usage
A New setting is introduced - `EXHORT_PYTHON_INSTALL_BEST_EFFORTS` (as both env variable/key in `options` object)
1. `EXHORT_PYTHON_INSTALL_BEST_EFFORTS`="false" - install requirements.txt while respecting declared versions for all packages.
2. `EXHORT_PYTHON_INSTALL_BEST_EFFORTS`="true" - install all packages from requirements.txt, not respecting the declared version, but trying to install a version tailored for the used python version, when using this setting,you must set setting `MATCH_MANIFEST_VERSIONS`="false"

##### Using `pipdeptree`
By Default, The API algorithm will use native commands of PIP installer as data source to build the dependency tree.
It's also possible, to use lightweight Python PIP utility [pipdeptree](https://pypi.org/project/pipdeptree/) as data source instead, in order to activate this,
Need to set environment variable/option - `EXHORT_PIP_USE_DEP_TREE` to true.

<!-- Badge links -->
[0]: https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/trustification/exhort-javascript-api?color=green&label=latest
[1]: https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/trustification/exhort-javascript-api?color=yellow&include_prereleases&label=early-access

### Known Issues

- For pip requirements.txt - It's been observed that for python versions 3.11.x, there might be slowness for invoking the analysis.
  If you encounter a performance issue with version >= 3.11.x, kindly try to set environment variable/option `EXHORT_PIP_USE_DEP_TREE=true`, before calling the analysis.


- For maven pom.xml, it has been noticed that using java 17 might cause stack analysis to hang forever.
  This is caused by maven [`dependency` Plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-dependency-plugin/) bug when running with JDK/JRE' JVM version 17.

  To overcome this, you can use any other java version (14,20,21, etc..). ( best way is to install JDK/JRE version different from 17 , and set the location of the installation in environment variable `JAVA_HOME` so maven will use it.)

Commit message:

feat: support toggling of recommendations (#233)

README.md, after:

# Exhort JavaScript API<br/>![latest-no-snapshot][0] ![latest-snapshot][1]

* Looking for the OpenAPI Spec? Try [Exhort API Spec](https://github.com/trustification/exhort-api-spec)
* Looking for our Java API? Try [Exhort Java API](https://github.com/trustification/exhort-java-api).
* Looking for our Backend implementation? Try [Exhort](https://github.com/trustification/exhort).

The _Exhort JavaScript API_ module is deployed to _GitHub Package Registry_.

<details>
<summary>Click here for configuring <em>GHPR</em> registry access.</summary>
<h3>Configure Registry Access</h3>
<p>
Create a
<a href="https://docs.github.com/en/packages/learn-github-packages/introduction-to-github-packages#authenticating-to-github-packages">token</a>
with the <strong>read:packages</strong> scope<br/>

> Based on
> <a href="https://docs.github.com/en/packages/working-with-a-github-packages-registry/working-with-the-npm-registry#authenticating-to-github-packages">GitHub documentation</a>,
> In <em>Actions</em> you can use <em>GITHUB_TOKEN</em>
</p>
<p>

Add the following line to the <em>.npmrc</em> file in your user home (
See [GH Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/packages/working-with-a-github-packages-registry/working-with-the-npm-registry#authenticating-with-a-personal-access-token)):

```text
//npm.pkg.github.com/:_authToken=<your-ghp-token-goes-here>
```
</p>
</details>

<h3>Usage</h3>
<p>
Configuring <em>NPM</em> to look in <em>GHPR</em> for the <em>trustification</em> namespace is done by adding
<code>@trustification:registry=https://npm.pkg.github.com</code> to <em>.npmrc</em> in the project root or user home.

```shell
echo "@trustification:registry=https://npm.pkg.github.com" >> .npmrc
```
</p>

<ul>
<li>
Use as ESM Module from an ESM module

```shell
npm install @trustification/exhort-javascript-api
```

```javascript
import exhort from '@trustification/exhort-javascript-api'
import fs from 'node:fs'

// Get stack analysis in JSON format
let stackAnalysis = await exhort.stackAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml')
// Get stack analysis in HTML format (string)
let stackAnalysisHtml = await exhort.stackAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml', true)
// Get component analysis in JSON format
let componentAnalysis = await exhort.componentAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml')
```
</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>
Use as ESM Module from Common-JS module

```shell
npm install @trustification/exhort-javascript-api
```

```javascript
async function loadExhort()
{
// dynamic import is the only way to import ESM module into commonJS module
  const { default: exhort } = await import('@trustification/exhort-javascript-api');
  return exhort
}
const runExhort = (manifestPath) => {
  return new Promise(async ( resolve, reject) => {
    try {
      let stackAnalysisReport = await (await loadExhort()).stackAnalysis(manifestPath,false)
      resolve(stackAnalysisReport)

    } catch (error)
    {
      reject(error)
    }
  });
};

runExhort("./path/to/manifest").then(resp => console.log(JSON.stringify(resp,null,4)))
```
</li>

<li>
Use as CLI Script
<details>
<summary>Click for help menu</summary>

```shell
$ npx @trustification/exhort-javascript-api help

Usage: exhort-javascript-api {component|stack}

Commands:
  exhort-javascript-api stack </path/to/manifest> [--html|--summary]               produce stack report for manifest path
  exhort-javascript-api component <path/to/manifest> [--summary]   produce component report for a manifest type and content

Options:
  --help  Show help                                                    [boolean]
```
</details>

```shell
# get stack analysis in json format
$ npx @trustification/exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml

# get stack analysis in json format (summary only)
$ npx @trustification/exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml --summary

# get stack analysis in html format format
$ npx @trustification/exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml --html

# get component analysis
$ npx @trustification/exhort-javascript-api component /path/to/pom.xml
```
</li>

<li>
Use as Global Binary

```shell
npm install --global @trustification/exhort-javascript-api
```

```shell
# get stack analysis in json format
$ exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml

# get stack analysis in json format (summary only)
$ exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml --summary

# get stack analysis in html format format
$ exhort-javascript-api stack /path/to/pom.xml --html

# get component analysis
$ exhort-javascript-api component /path/to/pom.xml
```
</li>
</ul>

<h3>Supported Ecosystems</h3>
<ul>
<li><a href="https://www.java.com/">Java</a> - <a href="https://maven.apache.org/">Maven</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.javascript.com/">JavaScript</a> - <a href="https://www.npmjs.com/">Npm</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.javascript.com/">JavaScript</a> - <a href="https://pnpm.io/">pnpm</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.javascript.com/">JavaScript</a> - <a href="https://classic.yarnpkg.com/">Yarn Classic</a> /  <a href="https://yarnpkg.com/">Yarn Berry</a></li>
<li><a href="https://go.dev/">Golang</a> - <a href="https://go.dev/blog/using-go-modules/">Go Modules</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.python.org/">Python</a> - <a href="https://pypi.org/project/pip/">pip Installer</a></li>
<li><a href="https://gradle.org/">Gradle (Groovy and Kotlin DSL)</a> - <a href="https://gradle.org/install/">Gradle Installation</a></li>
</ul>

<h3>Excluding Packages</h3>
<p>
Excluding a package from any analysis can be achieved by marking the package for exclusion.
</p>

<ul>
<li>
<em>Java Maven</em> users can add a comment in <em>pom.xml</em>

```xml
<dependency> <!--exhortignore-->
  <groupId>...</groupId>
  <artifactId>...</artifactId>
  <version>...</version>
</dependency>
```
</li>

</ul>
<ul>
<li>
<em>Javascript</em> users can add a root (key, value) pair with value of list of names (strings) to be ignored (without versions), and key called <b>exhortignore</b> in <em>package.json</em>,  example:

```json
{
  "name": "sample",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "js",
  "keywords": [],
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC",
  "dependencies": {
    "dotenv": "^8.2.0",
    "express": "^4.17.1",
    "jsonwebtoken": "^8.5.1",
    "mongoose": "^5.9.18"
  },
  "exhortignore": [
    "jsonwebtoken"
  ]
}
```

<em>Golang</em> users can add in go.mod a comment with //exhortignore next to the package to be ignored, or to "piggyback" on existing comment ( e.g - //indirect) , for example:
```go
module github.com/trustification/SaaSi/deployer

go 1.19

require (
        github.com/gin-gonic/gin v1.9.1
        github.com/google/uuid v1.1.2
        github.com/jessevdk/go-flags v1.5.0 //exhortignore
        github.com/kr/pretty v0.3.1
        gopkg.in/yaml.v2 v2.4.0
        k8s.io/apimachinery v0.26.1
        k8s.io/client-go v0.26.1
)

require (
        github.com/davecgh/go-spew v1.1.1 // indirect exhortignore
        github.com/emicklei/go-restful/v3 v3.9.0 // indirect
        github.com/go-logr/logr v1.2.3 // indirect //exhortignore

)
```

<em>Python pip</em> users can add in requirements.txt a comment with #exhortignore(or # exhortignore) to the right of the same artifact to be ignored, for example:
```properties
anyio==3.6.2
asgiref==3.4.1
beautifulsoup4==4.12.2
certifi==2023.7.22
chardet==4.0.0
click==8.0.4 #exhortignore
contextlib2==21.6.0
fastapi==0.75.1
Flask==2.0.3
h11==0.13.0
idna==2.10
immutables==0.19
importlib-metadata==4.8.3
itsdangerous==2.0.1
Jinja2==3.0.3
MarkupSafe==2.0.1
pydantic==1.9.2 # exhortignore
requests==2.25.1
six==1.16.0
sniffio==1.2.0
soupsieve==2.3.2.post1
starlette==0.17.1
typing_extensions==4.1.1
urllib3==1.26.16
uvicorn==0.17.0
Werkzeug==2.0.3
zipp==3.6.0

```

<em>Gradle</em> users can add in build.gradle a comment with //exhortignore next to the package to be ignored:
```build.gradle
plugins {
id 'java'
}

group = 'groupName'
version = 'version'

repositories {
    mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation "groupId:artifactId:version" // exhortignore
}
test {
    useJUnitPlatform()
}
```

All of the 5 above examples are valid for marking a package to be ignored
</li>

</ul>

<h3>Customization</h3>
<p>
There are 2 approaches for customizing <em>Exhort JavaScript API</em>. Whether you're using this API as a
<em>Global Module</em>, a <em>Remote Script</em>, or an <em>ESM Module</em>, you can use <em>Environment Variables</em>
for various customization.

However, <em>ESM Module</em> users, can opt for customizing programmatically:

```javascript
import exhort from '@trustification/exhort-javascript-api'
import fs from 'node:fs'

let options = {
  'EXHORT_MVN_PATH': '/path/to/my/mvn',
  'EXHORT_NPM_PATH': '/path/to/npm',
  'EXHORT_PNPM_PATH': '/path/to/pnpm',
  'EXHORT_GO_PATH': '/path/to/go',
  //python - python3, pip3 take precedence if python version > 3 installed
  'EXHORT_PYTHON3_PATH' : '/path/to/python3',
  'EXHORT_PIP3_PATH' : '/path/to/pip3',
  'EXHORT_PYTHON_PATH' : '/path/to/python',
  'EXHORT_PIP_PATH' : '/path/to/pip',
  'EXHORT_GRADLE_PATH' : '/path/to/gradle',
  // Configure proxy for all requests
  'EXHORT_PROXY_URL': 'http://proxy.example.com:8080'
}

// Get stack analysis in JSON format ( all package managers, pom.xml is as an example here)
let stackAnalysis = await exhort.stackAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml', false, options)
// Get stack analysis in HTML format in string ( all package managers, pom.xml is as an example here)
let stackAnalysisHtml = await exhort.stackAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml', true, options)

// Get component analysis in JSON format
let componentAnalysis = await exhort.componentAnalysis('/path/to/pom.xml', options)
```
 **_Environment variables takes precedence._**
</p>

<h4>Proxy Configuration</h4>
<p>
You can configure a proxy for all HTTP/HTTPS requests made by the API. This is useful when your environment requires going through a proxy to access external services.

You can set the proxy URL in two ways:

1. Using environment variable:
```shell
export EXHORT_PROXY_URL=http://proxy.example.com:8080
```

2. Using the options object when calling the API programmatically:
```javascript
const options = {
  'EXHORT_PROXY_URL': 'http://proxy.example.com:8080'
}
```

The proxy URL should be in the format: `http://host:port` or `https://host:port`. The API will automatically use the appropriate protocol (HTTP or HTTPS) based on the proxy URL provided.
</p>

<h4>Customizing Executables</h4>
<p>
This project uses each ecosystem's executable for creating dependency trees. These executables are expected to be
present on the system's PATH environment. If they are not, or perhaps you want to use custom ones. Use can use the
following keys for setting custom paths for the said executables.
</p>

<table>
<tr>
<th>Ecosystem</th>
<th>Default</th>
<th>Executable Key</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://maven.apache.org/">Maven</a></td>
<td><em>mvn</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_MVN_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://maven.apache.org/">Maven</a></td>
<td><em>maven</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PREFER_MVNW</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://www.npmjs.com/">NPM</a></td>
<td><em>npm</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_NPM_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://pnpm.io/">PNPM</a></td>
<td><em>pnpm</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PNPM_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://classic.yarnpkg.com/">Yarn Classic</a> / <a href="https://yarnpkg.com/">Yarn Berry</a></td>
<td><em>yarn</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_YARN_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://go.dev/blog/using-go-modules/">Go Modules</a></td>
<td><em>go</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_GO_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://www.python.org/">Python programming language</a></td>
<td><em>python3</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PYTHON3_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://pypi.org/project/pip/">Python pip Package Installer</a></td>
<td><em>pip3</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PIP3_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://www.python.org/">Python programming language</a></td>
<td><em>python</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PYTHON_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://pypi.org/project/pip/">Python pip Package Installer</a></td>
<td><em>pip</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PIP_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://gradle.org/">Gradle</a></td>
<td><em>gradle</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_GRADLE_PATH</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="https://gradle.org/">Gradle</a></td>
<td><em>gradle</em></td>
<td>EXHORT_PREFER_GRADLEW</td>
</tr>
</table>

#### Match Manifest Versions Feature

##### Background

In Python pip and in golang go modules package managers ( especially in Python pip) , There is a big chance that for a certain manifest and a given package inside it, the client machine environment has different version installed/resolved
for that package, which can lead to perform the analysis on the installed packages' versions , instead on the declared versions ( in manifests - that is requirements.txt/go.mod ), and this
can cause a confusion for the user in the client consuming the API and leads to inconsistent output ( in THE manifest there is version X For a given Package `A` , and in the analysis report there is another version for the same package `A` - Y).

##### Usage

To eliminate confusion and improve clarity as discussed above, the following setting was introduced - `MATCH_MANIFEST_VERSIONS`, in the form of environment variable/key in opts ( as usual , environment variable takes precedence )
for two ecosystems:
 - Golang - Go Modules
 - Python - pip

Two possible values for this setting:

1. MATCH_MANIFEST_VERSIONS="false" - means that if installed/resolved versions of packages are different than the ones declared in the manifest, the process will ignore this difference and will continue to analysis with installed/resolved versions ( this is the original logic flow )
<br>


2. MATCH_MANIFEST_VERSIONS="true" - means that before starting the analysis,
   the api will compare all the versions of packages in manifest against installed/resolved versions on client' environment, in case there is a difference, it will throw an error to the client/user with message containing the first encountered versions mismatch, including package name, and the versions difference, and will suggest to set setting `MATCH_MANIFEST_VERSIONS`="false" to ignore all differences


#### Golang Support

By default, all go.mod' packages' transitive modules will be taken to analysis with their original package version, that is,
if go.mod has 2 modules, `a` and `b`, and each one of them has the same package c with same major version v1, but different minor versions:
- namespace/c/v1@v1.1
- namespace/c/v1@v1.2


Then both of these packages will be entered to the generated sbom and will be included in analysis returned to client.
In golang, in an actual build of an application into an actual application executable binary, only one of the minor versions will be included in the executable, as only packages with same name but different major versions considered different packages ,
hence can co-exist together in the application executable.

Go ecosystem knows how to select one minor version among all the minor versions of the same major version of a given package, using the [MVS Algorithm](https://go.dev/ref/mod#minimal-version-selection).

In order to enable this behavior, that only shows in analysis modules versions that are actually built into the application executable, please set
system property/environment variable - `EXHORT_GO_MVS_LOGIC_ENABLED=true`(Default is false)




#### Python Support

By default, For python support, the api assumes that the package is installed using the pip/pip3 binary on the system PATH, or using the customized
Binaries passed to environment variables. In any case, If the package is not installed , then an error will be thrown.

There is an experimental feature of installing the requirements.txt on a virtual env(only python3 or later is supported for this feature) - in this case,
it's important to pass in a path to python3 binary as `EXHORT_PYTHON3_PATH` or instead make sure that python3 is on the system path.
in such case, You can use that feature by setting environment variable `EXHORT_PYTHON_VIRTUAL_ENV` to true.

##### "Best Efforts Installation"
Since Python pip packages are very sensitive/picky regarding python version changes( every small range of versions is only tailored for a certain python version), I'm introducing this feature, that
tries to install all packages in requirements.txt onto created virtual environment while **disregarding** versions declared for packages in requirements.txt.
This increasing the chances and the probability that the automatic installation will succeed.

###### Usage
A New setting is introduced - `EXHORT_PYTHON_INSTALL_BEST_EFFORTS` (as both env variable/key in `options` object)
1. `EXHORT_PYTHON_INSTALL_BEST_EFFORTS`="false" - install requirements.txt while respecting declared versions for all packages.
2. `EXHORT_PYTHON_INSTALL_BEST_EFFORTS`="true" - install all packages from requirements.txt, not respecting the declared version, but trying to install a version tailored for the used python version. When using this setting, you must set setting `MATCH_MANIFEST_VERSIONS` to 'false'.

##### Using `pipdeptree`
By default, The API algorithm will use native commands of PIP installer as data source to build the dependency tree.
It's also possible to use the lightweight Python PIP utility [pipdeptree](https://pypi.org/project/pipdeptree/) as data source instead. In order to activate this, you need to set the environment variable/option `EXHORT_PIP_USE_DEP_TREE` to 'true'.

#### Toggle Red Hat Trusted Content recommendations
Both the HTML-based report and JSON response will by default contain recommendations for migrating to Red Hat-based Trusted Content repositories. This feature can be disabled by setting `EXHORT_RECOMMENDATIONS_ENABLED` to 'false' via environment variables or options.

<!-- Badge links -->
[0]: https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/trustification/exhort-javascript-api?color=green&label=latest
[1]: https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/trustification/exhort-javascript-api?color=yellow&include_prereleases&label=early-access

### Known Issues

- For pip requirements.txt - It's been observed that for python versions 3.11.x, there might be slowness for invoking the analysis.
  If you encounter a performance issue with version >= 3.11.x, kindly try to set environment variable/option `EXHORT_PIP_USE_DEP_TREE=true`, before calling the analysis.


- For maven pom.xml, it has been noticed that using java 17 might cause stack analysis to hang forever.
  This is caused by maven [`dependency` plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-dependency-plugin/) bug when running with JDK/JRE' JVM version 17.

  To overcome this, you can use any other java version (14,20,21, etc..). ( best way is to install JDK/JRE version different from 17 , and set the location of the installation in environment variable `JAVA_HOME` so maven will use it.)
